>> Hello there.
Are you ready to watch
this movie or what?
My name is Sergei.
I'm 29 years old and healthy
eating changed my life.
Check it out.
24 years ago when my
family immigrated to the US
from Russia, we
ate a typical diet
rich in processed food, sugar,
wheat, meat, and fast food.
Within a few short
years, this lifestyle
led my mother,
father, sister, and I
to unhappiness,
sickness, and suffering.
Thankfully we were able to
turn it around and reclaim
our health by changing
our diet and adopting
a healthier lifestyle.
Because of the persistence
of my Russian mother,
we threw away that crap
food we had in our kitchen,
smashed the microwave
with a hammer,
and started eating fresh
whole foods the way
that nature intended.
At the core of our success was
a simple yet powerful drink
we refer to as green smoothie.
If you are unfamiliar with
this concept, let me explain.
A green smoothie
is a homemade drink
made from blended leafy
greens and fresh ripe fruit.
Nothing is bottled, pasteurized,
or otherwise altered.
What you put in
the blender is what
you get out of it, pure
nutrients that taste great.
When you mixed greens
and fruits together,
you create a perfect marriage
of delicious and nutritious.
The fruit sugars counteract
the intense taste of the greens
and allow you to intake
more vitamins, minerals,
and antioxidants than
you typically would
on any given day.
One cup of such a
smoothie contains
between five and seven servings
of fruits and vegetables.
If you were to consume one quart
of this green liquid regularly,
you could potentially
drink 32 servings of health
every single day.
This would supercharge you in
ways you can't even imagine.
Over the last decade, my mother
has written numerous books
about green smoothies.
She's also conducted over
20 week long green smoothie
retreats.
My involvement in all this
has further opened my eyes
to the miraculous benefits that
can come from dietary change.
I've seen people
tackle everything
from diabetes to insomnia
simply by introducing
more greens into their diet.
I am now beyond convinced
that if you have any health
problems, smoothies and whole
foods can help you immensely.
The more transformations
I saw, the more
I found myself becoming
curious about what effect
green smoothies would have
on seemingly healthy people,
specifically athletes.
I wanted to find out if
green smoothies could
improve performance,
speed up recovery time,
and increase endurance.
Being very active myself, I
seem to have a surplus of energy
which allows me to
conquer mountains,
surf for hours on end,
and dance salsa non-stop.
Yet I don't eat
pasta, drinks sports
drinks, or take
nutritional supplements.
Could this wealth
of energy be sourced
from my regular intake
of green smoothies
and fresh organic food?
And would my green smoothies
have the same effect
on other athletic people?
I looked around the internet
for information on this subject,
but didn't find any
studies in this area.
So I decided to
conduct a study myself.
If smoothies could improve
athletic performance,
I wanted solid proof.
I rounded up 10 of my
most active friends
and convinced them to drink
my homemade green smoothies
for six weeks in the middle
of their training schedules.
I made sure that
the folks I selected
were healthy to begin with.
After I collected all of
the initial baseline data
about my athletes,
they were instructed
not to change anything
about their diet, lifestyle,
or exercise routine,
except for the addition
of one quart of
smoothie every day
for the duration of six weeks.
In this way, I could
monitor their progress
and see if my smoothies
had any positive effects.
It is important to note
that all of my athletes
ate a more or less
traditional diet.
None of them were
vegetarian or vegan.
As far as I'm aware, nobody has
conducted such an experiment
before.
So sit back, relax, and
see what happens when you
get powered by green smoothies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Michael
Gallo and I'm 33 years old.
>> My name is Joanne
Feinberg and I'm 53.
>> My name is Kymmi
Kellems and I'm 25.
>> My name is Eric Handler.
I'm 42 years old.
>> I'm Jace Ives.
I'm 29 years old.
>> I am Emile Garcia.
I'm 32 years old.
>> Ben Chu, 29 years old.
>> My name is Laura
Fister and I'm 30.
>> Sean Roberts, and 31.
>> My name is Aaron Reed.
I'm 31 years old.
>> Since my budget only allowed
for a small sample size,
I was determined to do
everything in my power
to accurately conduct, monitor,
and record the progress of this
experiment.
After I confirmed who
was going to partake,
I put them through a
rigorous interview process
to collect as much
data as possible.
How much do you exercise?
>> I exercise approximately,
depending on the day,
three to five hours a day.
>> I do CrossFit about five
or six days a week and about
an hour a day.
And then I also dance on top of
that four to five hours a day,
five days a week.
>> The types of sports that I
do regularly is pretty much just
running and lifting weights.
I run about 60 miles
a week in six days
and the longest running
I've ever done was 36 miles.
>> What challenges do you
experience as an athlete?
>> My biggest challenges have
been pain and injury and weight
loss.
Definitely.
I tend to put on muscle mass
really fast or fat really fast,
depending if I'm training
enough during the week or not.
>> The challenge I experience is
a little time related and just
fatigue.
>> I work construction
during the day.
So in the evenings, which is
the time I have to work out,
I have less energy and sometimes
kind of hydration problems.
So I'm trying to stay hydrated
and have enough energy
to maintain the
level of performance
that I want for the workout.
>> Getting enough sleep.
I don't sleep all
that great, so I
would say it's a big challenge.
>> I tend to fatigue quickly.
I have had knee
surgery five years ago,
longer than that now.
And it tends to act up
on occasion when I run,
especially when I notice that.
>> What is your prediction for
this project and do you have
any fears?
>> No, I don't have any fears.
>> I'm not sure how much
difference will be noticeable
in such a short amount of time.
>> I don't have any fears.
I'm actually really excited.
I generally try to follow a
kind of paleolithic style diet
and I've been really between
owning a CrossFit gym
and working two other
jobs, and then trying
to get my own
training in, sometimes
I find that I either don't eat
or that the content of what
I eat tends to be
not the most ideal.
>> I don't have any fears or
concerns about the project.
And I hope that it will
make me feel healthier.
>> Overall I feel pretty
positive about it.
I don't see how it
could hurt anything.
And if it increases my
performance, I'm all about it.
So, see what happens.
>> My main supplements beer
I think that drinking a quart
of green smoothies that are
organic every day for six
weeks, I don't see how it's
not going to at least partially
improve my performance.
>> Despite being
fit and healthy,
I learned that my friends
battled with fatigue,
slow recovery, sleep
irregularities,
and frequent injuries
throughout their active lives.
And as for the
smoothies, the group
seemed excited to
start drinking them,
but few were convinced
that these drinks would
affect their
endurance and health
in such a short amount of time.
My personal hypothesis
is that you're
going to notice that you're
going to recover faster.
Your body's going to
hopefully work better.
So you're going to feel
lighter on your feet.
And hopefully, this will
make you more endurant.
Because when we feel
light it's easier to run,
lift, swim, bike,
whatever you do.
Today we've got to make
a decision whether or not
we're absolutely 100% in.
At this point I'm going to
start spending a lot of money
on each and every one of you.
And I'd rather know now
if you want to back out.
Because I'd be way less
offended now than later
on down the road.
Come on in.
We'll do this, one, two,
three, green smoothies!
In order to objectively
gauge whether or not
any benefits would come
from drinking smoothies,
I needed to find
a control group.
But how would I control
for green smoothies?
And what would my
placebo drink be?
After struggling
with this dilemma,
I decided to check in with
several researchers at Southern
Oregon University about
how to properly set up
a control group.
I learned that as an
alternative to having
a completely different
set of individuals
as my control group, I
could control my athletes
against themselves.
Because my athletes followed
both a consistent exercise
and diet regimen, I could
collect their free smoothie
data and use that
information as my baseline.
After six weeks of
green smoothie drinking,
I would put them through
the exact same tests
and see if anything had changed.
Before I began, I
decided to check
in with several medical
and sports professionals
to get some tips on how
best to conduct this study
and how to track my progress.
>> Hi, I'm Geoff Houghton.
I'm a naturopathic physician,
practice here in Ashland.
I'm a general practice.
I see people with
problems anything
from toenail fungus
to depression
and all sorts of
stuff in between.
I use natural medicine
when it is the best choice.
But I'm not dogmatic.
The way I see it
is, that there's
no morality in biochemistry.
And so I use what works.
And generally
speaking, nutrition
is a great method for treatment.
And so I use a lot of that.
But if I need to, yeah, I
pull out my drug handbook
and write prescriptions,
because they work.
Nutrition obviously is one of
the foundations of good health.
You have to have high quality
nutrients going into the body.
Of course, what
you do with those
nutrients is also
very important.
How well do you digest it?
How well do you absorb it?
There are many other fundamental
factors in good health
like sleep, like exercise,
how happy you are.
But nutrients are really
one of just the founding,
the basis of good health.
>> What types of health
markers should we test for?
>> This study we discussed
different markers,
what should we look at?
And so some of the
ideas we had were
looking at cholesterol levels,
vitamin C levels, vitamin E,
levels of inflammation.
And so the C reactive protein
is a very sensitive measure
of inflammation.
That's a great choice.
The sed rate, which measures
how sticky red blood cells are.
It's also a good
measure of inflammation.
And then we've got some
more exotic measures
that measure oxidative stress.
So the urine lipid peroxide,
that's a great one.
>> Hi there.
I'm Ross Pelton.
I'm a pharmacist and
also a certified clinical
nutritionist.
>> What is a baseline test?
>> A baseline is when you do
a blood test at the beginning
to find out what your
initial values are.
I advocate that women should
get a baseline bone density
test at about age
35 or 40, so as they
get older and do a follow
up bone density test,
they'll have their
beginning baseline
tests to compare it to find
out if they're getting worse
or if they're staying the same.
It's just a starting point
is what the baseline is.
>> How frequently should
I administer a blood test?
Is it enough to
just do a baseline
and then do one at the end?
>> The more you do,
the better it will be.
It depends a little bit on
your financial limitations.
I think a beginning, a mid study
and an end study might be good.
>> My name is Jenny Slawta
and I'm an associate professor
at Southern Oregon University.
>> How is endurance measured?
Endurance is measured
with a gas analyzer
and you're looking at V02 max.
So basically, you hook
someone up to a gas analyzer.
We also call it
a metabolic cart.
They have a mask on and they're
breathing from ambient air,
so you know, just
basically from regular air.
And then they
exhale into what we
call a mixing chamber, which
is part of the machine, the gas
analyzer.
And that analyzes how
much oxygen was consumed.
And so if you use
a gas analyzer,
you get someone all
hooked up to this
and then you put them on a
treadmill or a bike or governor
and you increase the work
load every three minutes,
you'll see the oxygen uptake
increase, increase, increase.
At some point, if you're
able to reach them too there
they're varimax which is
sometimes or quite often
difficult to do
you'll see a plateau,
where they increase the workload
but the oxygen consumption just
plateaus.
And that's where we
identify max V02.
>> How will green smoothies
affect my athletes?
>> I believe that by putting
athletes on the green smoothies
that it depends.
It depends where
they're coming from.
What diet do they have
in the first place?
An athlete coming in that
has less healthful diet
I think you're going to see
more improvement as opposed
to one that might have
a really high quality
diet of fruits and vegetables.
>> I'm interested to see
how the project goes.
I think that there will be--
I know there'll be
substantial benefit
to the ingestion of these green
smoothies on a regular basis.
It will be interesting
to see how much of that
we can document.
I'm interested to be
tracking this with you.
>> When you first brought
up this kind of pilot study
of yours, I thought, you know,
that this is cool because I
love veggies, fresh fruit,
veggies, great stuff.
So for a smoothie, boy,
easy to digest and absorb.
So it's a great medium, a great
delivery medium for nutrients.
And you know, with all
those nutrients in there,
antioxidants, you gotta see
some sort of a difference.
>> I think this is going
to be a lot of fun.
I can't wait to see
what's going to happen
to all of these athletes
and how well they
do with green smoothies.
See the refills.
Infinity.
>> I heard about an ultra runner
who drank green smoothies.
So I interviewed him to
get his input on why he
found it necessary to do this.
>> My name is Timothy Olson.
I'm a mountain ultra
runner for the North Face.
The definition of
an ultra runner
is anything beyond the
marathon, 26.2 miles.
So in the last two
years I've just
had some really good wins and
a couple 100k championships
in the Western states, a couple
other 50 ks and 50 miles.
But those are the
biggest ones and I'm
humbled to have done
so well in the sport.
>> A traditional sports diet
instructs athletes to load up
on carbohydrates.
What do you think
about carb loading?
>> I just have kind of went
against the grain in diet.
And I found for
ultra running for me,
I like more grain free diets,
and not loading my body
with lots of carbs.
You know I have my green
smoothies I have fruit.
So I'm getting carbs in there.
And I think people overdo it.
They think they need all
these carbs to replenish
their glycogen storage.
You get enough of that
throughout the day.
And I've just, with
my body in recovery,
it's been beneficial
not to do all that.
>> Days before I officially
kicked off my study,
I was faced with an unexpected
hurdle, fire, smoke,
and horrible air quality
plagued the Rogue Valley.
Mmmm.
Oh, what's up, you guys?
It's August 8.
I'm sitting here
trying really hard not
to freak out because all
of Oregon is on fire.
Air quality is
absolutely terrible.
And all of my athletes that
are supposed to be in my movie,
being physically active,
they don't want to work out.
And I can't really blame them.
Basically I wake
up every morning
I have dark circles
under my eyes.
My lungs hurt.
I feel as though I'm smoking
six packs of cigarettes a day.
Not good.
We took our baselines yesterday
when it wasn't so bad.
So all the preliminary
blood work is done.
According to what
I was planning,
we were supposed to start
drinking smoothies next Monday
and just exercising,
tracking our benefits,
tracking how we feel.
And it looks like I might
have to postpone everything.
It's hard when things
get out of my control.
I do have one hope.
There's some
thunderstorms supposed
to roll in today and tomorrow.
And if we get a
really nice rain,
it might just put out the fires.
It might sort of wash
the smoke and the dust
and the ash particles
out of the air.
And we might be
back on schedule.
But until then, I'm just sitting
here with my fingers crossed.
[THUNDER AND RAIN]
You guys, thank you so
much for being here.
This is the baseline
endurance test.
We're going to be doing the
Cooper VO2 max field test.
It's not quite a VO2 max, but
it's the field equivalent.
Because we don't have
thousands of dollars
to spare on a VO2 max machine.
We're out here on
this beautiful track.
And basically, it's very simple.
We're going to run around
the track as many times
as we can in 12 minutes.
And then we'll tell you to stop.
And we'll do some
calculations and get a sense
of how endurant you are.
Don't get worried.
I'm not going to judge anybody.
Basically I just want
to see if anything
improves from the smoothies.
Because thus far, it's August.
You've probably been
running all summer.
So this will be a
really good baseline
because you haven't been
drinking any smoothies.
We're only going to change
just that one factor hopefully.
And who knows?
Maybe you'll double your laps
in six weeks after we're done.
The other thing that
I lined up for us
is an oxidative stress test.
It's going to come in the
mail hopefully this next week.
It's a urine test
so you can do it
in the privacy of your own home.
You don't have to go anywhere.
It doesn't test for drugs
in case you're worried.
So, basically what
that's going to tell
us is free radical information.
Because according to Ross
Pelton, the natural pharmacist,
and Dr. Houghton, people
who use their bodies a lot
have more free radical damage.
And we also want to see
if smoothies are going
to affect that in any way.
So, after that's done, our
baselines will be done.
I'll leave you guys alone.
I'll connect with
you guys one on one
and go to various events and
kind of film little segments
on you.
But other than that, I'll just
supply you with smoothies.
We're officially done.
You guys killed it.
And for now, as kind of a treat,
let's go have some smoothies.
This is a mango blueberry
banana with kale.
Doing the ladies first.
>> Thank you.
>> It's very green.
>> Jace, ladies first.
Thank you guys so
much for being here.
Cheers.
>> Cheers.
>> After the baseline
running test,
I established that all my
runners were in excellent
shape.
The distance.
Each of them ran in '12
minutes is considered excellent
for their age group.
I wondered how much
more they would improve,
given that they were
already in such great shape.
We're headed over
to CrossFit today
to do the baseline endurance
challenge for the CrossFitters.
Because I have two types of
athletes in my documentary,
I have the runners and
I have the CrossFitters,
I didn't think it'd
be fair to base
the endurance of CrossFitters
on a runners test.
So we're going to do two
tests we did the field VO2 max
test for the runners,
which gave us
basically some information
of where they're
at in their endurance there.
And now we're headed
over to CrossFit Ashland
to do the same thing
with the CrossFitters.
We're were CrossFit
Ashland here.
And we've chosen to
introduce you guys to Helen.
It's three rounds of a 400
meter run, 21 kettlebell swings,
and 12 pullups.
That's going to be our baseline
workout for the green smoothie
documentary.
We chose this because it
falls within about seven
to 12 minutes of
time duration, just
like the run did for the guys
and the gals for the runners.
And we're just hoping to
come out and crush it.
>> My CrossFitters were
also in good shape.
According to the
CrossFit test Helen,
they were within the
good to great range.
>> After the first three
weeks of smoothie drinking,
when I interviewed my
athletes individually,
I was disappointed to find
out that they weren't noticing
a whole lot of difference.
The consensus was they thought
they felt a little better,
but they weren't sure it was
a result of the smoothies.
I was worried that my
study was turning out
to be a waste of time.
Yet there was only
one thing I could do.
I had to finish the experiment.
Without telling my
athletes about my fears,
I continued supplying
them with smoothies,
all the while secretly hoping
something would change.
For those who may not know
that we might not mentioned it
earlier, Jace hurt his
foot a couple of weeks ago,
fell off a rock.
>> Sergei says that green
smoothies are pretty much good
for everything.
So, here we go and pour it on.
See if it heals me.
Ah, yeah.
And so not only is he
going to run 100 miles,
he's going to do so
as gimp, one footed.
We've been trying to
talk him out of it.
>> I'm going to use
a razor scooter.
>> Segue.
>> Roller skate.
[LAUGHTER]
>> What's up, man?
[CHEERING]
>> Yeah the biggest thing that I
really noticed about this whole
experiment is that not only
are my recovery times a lot
quicker, but I can do my hard
workouts with more ease than
before.
I have this definitely a
sensation of just floatiness.
And pain doesn't kick in
like when it would normally
kick in before.
My legs aren't getting
tired like they were before.
And I don't know if it
is the green smoothies.
But it's the only thing that
I have done differently.
And I've been running
since I was 11 years old.
So it's been pretty
interesting things.
It's making me
pretty stoked on it.
My brother is not
experiencing this.
Like he's seeing me
now pull away from him
even more so than before.
And I can tell it's even
frustrating him a little bit.
And he's making his own
smoothies every other day or so
now, just being like, huh.
Yeah.
I don't get it, man.
I don't get it.
I'm like, I don't get it either.
I told my little brother
when we were going out
for this 29 miler, I let him
know the one to two hours
was going to be the best
feeling probably because you're
nice and warmed up.
You're not going so fast that
you're getting worn out yet.
But that when you hit
two hours, your legs
are going to start
getting tired.
And by the time you
hit three hours,
you're probably really not
going to feel that good.
And it's just going to be
getting through the last hour.
And that's really where
you build your endurance.
Because you just
learn how to run when
your legs feel like crap.
And we hit two hours,
I felt absolutely fine.
And we just kept
moving through it.
And I hit three hours
and I turned to him,
and was, like, dude,
I'm not going to lie.
I feel fine right now.
And he's just like,
gave me the finger.
You know, just like,
this is not cool.
And then, the last hour I ended
up giving him the hydration
pack and just took off.
Because I had plenty energy.
Got home, form was great
the whole way home.
I was like able to maintain.
And then went through
the rest of the day
and slept, woke up in the
morning and felt great.
And that has never
happened before
to where I have that
kind of recovery time,
especially to where I
can do another work out
two days later.
And like today, the
day after that workout,
I've already ran again today.
And I just, I feel fine.
>> So essentially, you ran four
days ago and been running every
day since.
>> Oh yeah, every day and even
to, the big kicker was being
able to do that almost
19 miles yesterday,
at like you know 6:45 pace.
And that's chilling.
That's not like pushing or
feeling pain anywhere, even
getting heavy legs at all.
It just I mean, I could
have done another six.
I was just like, I'm not
going to push it right now.
Like whatever, I came
out to do the 30k.
And I did it.
And oh, well, that
it felt that easy.
I don't know if it's
a placebo or what.
Maybe it is the smoothie.
It's really the only
thing that's different.
So, I don't know.
Thank you.
>> I've definitely noticed
some results as it were.
I think for me,
I'm probably kind
of a bit of a different
case than a lot
of the other athletes that
are getting tested on this.
Because I've been injured
throughout the whole thing.
So I haven't really been able
to train or go on 100 mile runs
like some of these other guys,
or do what I traditionally
like to do, which is you
know move big weights.
I've been kind of sidelined.
But even though I've been
sidelined, and not training,
my weight has actually--
I've dropped about
three or four pounds.
And I haven't gained
any weight at all
without training, which for
me is kind of a big deal.
Because I can like
look at a loaf of bread
and gain three pounds.
So that's exciting.
>> I notice that my
recovery time has decreased.
Because I did that
CrossFit up in Bend
at the Summer Oregon Games.
And I also did it last year.
And last year when I did,
it I was out for at least
a week after the competition
before I was back in the gym
training again.
And this year after
the competition,
I took one day off and then I
was back in the gym training
hard the next day.
So that was really exciting.
My appetite decreased.
I haven't needed to eat as
much quantity and as often,
which, I just opened a
dance studio this week.
And it has been really good
because I don't have the time
to eat, but I don't need it
because I have the nutrition
from the green smoothies.
>> So since we've started
drinking it, you know,
we're drinking a quart a day.
And it's just knocked
down my appetite.
It's driving me to eat healthier
and less, which is really nice.
I'm down eight
pounds and obviously
that's lower food consumption.
But that's directly attributed
to the green smoothie
being in the mix,
you know, and getting
all those healthy greens
and fruit and everything.
In the last three
months, knowing this
was happening, I
didn't change anything
in my dietary intake,
my exercise scheduling,
sleep patterns,
everything's the same,
other than adding in
the green smoothies.
Overall though in
all my workouts,
I feel like my cardio is intact.
And I'm running
better, lifting faster.
I'm excited to run now.
I've never been excited to run.
Because now it doesn't affect
me you, know coming off a run,
then you have to lift weights.
You want to be prepared and be
able to control your breathing.
So you have to like rest until
you can control your breathing.
And that doesn't seem
to be an issue anymore.
I can come right in through
the door, pick up the weight
and start moving.
And you know whatever
external object I got to move.
So if that continues, I'm going
to be really, really pleased
with it.
>> So this summer in July, I
ran a 50 mile race in the SOB.
And the race went pretty
well and the recovery
was pretty typical for me,
like soreness for a day or two
after, pretty tired
for a week or so.
Definitely wanting to
take a break from running.
And then three weeks later I ran
the Waldo 100 k, 62 mile race,
which was my first time
doing that distance.
And the race was really
hard, but the recovery
was pretty amazing to me.
I mean, like three
days after the race
I was hardly sore at all.
I was not sore.
I mean, I really
was not sore at all.
I felt great.
All the entire day
after the race,
I just sipped on
green smoothies.
And I think that was key.
I may be sleeping better.
That's another thing
that I've noticed
from drinking the smoothies.
The jury's still out,
but the last two weeks
I've had like good six
hour chunks of sleep, which
is really unusual for me, so
kind of keeping my fingers
crossed.
Since I've been drinking
green smoothies,
the main things I've noticed
is my energy throughout the day
is elevated, it's maintained.
It doesn't have as many
tips as it did before.
Another big notice is my mood.
I'm happier throughout
the day, less mood swings.
Not that I have any mood
swings, but, yeah just happier
throughout the day.
And feeling good, good energy.
I've noticed a lot less craving
for sugary and fatty foods.
That's my usual thing.
Like, if I've been running
a lot during the week
Craig likes some Newman-Os
or some other processed,
kind of junk food or
greasy, fatty foods.
Those cravings have
definitely reduced a lot.
Yeah, I've noticed that
my mental capacity is
a lot better, and my
focus and concentration
seem to be improved.
And my overall energy just seems
to be real even and my moods
or even.
And coffee has just sort
of fallen away from me.
I drink an awful lot
of coffee every day.
And it's not that I don't
like coffee anymore,
I just don't gravitate
towards it, which
is kind of interesting to me.
Just because in a
day, I could drink
six or seven cups of coffee.
And now I might have
one in the morning,
but it's not a
desperate situation.
It's replaced an awful lot
of food in my diet too.
I don't have much of an appetite
aside from the green smoothies.
And I supplement my workouts
with protein, meat and stuff.
But the green smoothies are
just so thick and delicious,
it's just like I don't
really have a lot of appetite
the rest of the day.
It fills me up, so it
just feels way healthier
to be eating like that.
>> Since having added the
smoothies into my routine
and diet, I definitely notice
the increase in energy level,
especially with my running.
I drink them right before
I go in the mornings.
And I definitely feel more
energized and more ready
and not as tired.
Like normally the first half
hour or so can be really tough.
Or depending on the long run, it
can be for hours really tough.
But I feel like once I
start like I'm ready to go.
I'm just awake and
energized and ready to run.
>> I don't think I noticed
anything different until
probably about four weeks.
And then I just, when
doing runs and whatnot,
I just felt like,
afterwards, I just felt
like I could just keep going.
It was like long
races, afterwards,
like the recovery just
felt much, much better.
I don't know if I can attribute
it to the smoothies or not.
But it was something a little
bit different than usual.
>> Did you change anything
else during this time?
>> No.
And that's actually
something that
surprised me is,
this time of year,
I actually usually
go down in fitness.
Because it's usually, have some
races at the end of the summer.
And then, kind of
just like taper off.
Go back to work.
And this year I felt like
my fitness didn't really
go down much.
I didn't have any really
different training
or anything else.
So I guess another
thing that has changed
is, I do crave sweets
less, which is nice.
Because I have a
huge sweet tooth.
And it's nice.
Now I just kind of
crave smoothies,
but I guess it's
much better for me.
>> The most obvious difference
that I've noticed in the way I
feel is that I don't have
like the same sort of lags
in my energy level
throughout the day.
To the point where in the
first couple of weeks,
it was almost odd where I
would drink it in the morning.
And then by 3:00
in the afternoon,
I still hadn't had any of
my usual cravings for lunch.
And I just try to
kind of usually
listen to hunger and all that.
And so it felt strange to me.
Like, maybe I should-- maybe
I need to go eat right now.
Because I haven't eaten and
it's this late in the day.
But energy still felt great.
I still was eating, just
kind of later in the day.
It was kind of
just changing when
I ate and then
also what I craved,
and just kind of
craving cleaner food.
Having added green
smoothies to my diet,
I definitely noticed
that my recovery
is a lot shorter especially
with cardio based workouts.
It might be two to three
hours, where in the past,
it might have been two
to three days sometimes.
When that's been a real
positive for me, in the sense,
that I can get more workouts
in if I want to/ or I can feel
fresher to move on
to whatever is next.
Another thing that I've noticed
about the green smoothies
is that my fingernails seem
to be growing a lot quicker,
which I suppose means that I'm
getting more of the minerals
that I need.
>> You don't waste
any green smoothie.
I'm not just saying
that for the camera.
It's really good.
>> As the study came to an end
and all the blood work had been
completed, it was time to check
in with the experts and get
the data on how the smoothies
affected my athletes.
I was excited to find
out which of the markers
we tested for showed the
biggest improvements.
Hi, my name's Sergei.
Nice to meet you.
>> Hi.
Larry Shrewsbury.
>> Thank you so much for--
>> Have a seat.
OK, so I took in the data.
First, we did a hypothesis test.
And then we followed that up
with a confidence interval.
So after I did
the report, then I
went through I
looked at which ones
were statistically significant.
That's where we got a
call in the professionals,
the medical professionals.
They can look at these
confidence intervals
and be able to
answer the question,
is this narrowed down enough?
>> If I am reading
this correctly,
the sed rate was 2.5 higher
before and dropped that 2.5
for the after.
So you had a decrease,
a net decrease of 2.5
on the sed rate.
The higher the number,
the more inflammation,
the worse off the person is.
And if you have a sed rate
somewhere around zero to five,
zero to 10, it's OK.
Zero to two, zero to
three is excellent.
That's where I really
like to see it.
So a decrease in that
sed rate of two and 1/2
points, to me, that's important.
In one individual, it
doesn't jump out at me.
But if you have a
population of a few people,
10 people, something like
that, and the sed rate
has on average dropped by
2.5, that's pretty meaningful.
You've made some changes.
So the nutrients
in those smoothies
are having positive effects.
With inflammation, the more
research that gets done,
the more it turns out that it is
a critical piece for long term
health or ill health.
High levels of inflammation
cause problems.
There will be a higher
incidence of cancer.
So people who are
inflamed in general,
will have higher rates
say of colon cancer, lung
cancer, et cetera, et cetera.
They'll also have higher
rates of heart disease.
So you have more inflammation
in the arteries, the veins,
you're going to put
more plaques in there.
It's going to limit your
blood flow to your heart,
to your feet, all over.
And you don't work so well.
Limit blood flow to the brain,
your thinker doesn't work well.
So the more inflammation,
the worse off
you will be in the long term.
>> I'd say one of the
trends, more or less,
is that there were far more
athletes that had a decrease
in their C reactive protein
inflammatory marker,
which is a really good sign.
Here, Jace went from
17.17 down to 1.15.
That's a huge drop
in inflammation.
Kymmi went down in
CRP from 2.86 to 1.35,
fairly significant drop.
Here is Sean Roberts.
His CRP went down
from 0.48 to 0.25.
If you get your
inflammation marker down,
that's really, really good.
Emille, his CRP went
down from 2.9 to 1.68.
Eric went down from 1.33 to
0.67, which is a great drop.
That's very significant.
So there is a trend in CRP.
Laura went down in CRP.
Joanne went down.
Aaron that went down in CRP.
Ben went up.
[RECORD SCRATCH SOUND]
>> At the tail
end of my project,
I found out that Ben was the
least consistent in drinking
his smoothies.
Perhaps this is the reason his
CRP went up instead of down.
>> Overall--
>> So pretty much
one person went up.
The rest went down.
>> Yeah, so that is a trend that
I saw in the Lab Core printouts
here.
All of the athletes
except one had a decrease
in their C reactive protein
between the pre and post-test.
And that's a key
inflammatory marker
and inflammation is at the
core of all health problems,
whether it's arthritis,
obesity, cancer,
Alzheimer's disease, diabetes.
Inflammation is involved in
all those health conditions.
So if you can reduce
your inflammatory load
you're definitely improving
your health over time.
And it looks to me
like with all but one
of the athletes having a decline
in their C reactive protein,
we could say that
there was a benefit
of the green smoothies
in reducing inflammation
in the athletes.
And I think that's a key
take home from this study.
I'm firmly convinced that
drinking green smoothies
is really a good thing to do.
There's no downside
to it whatsoever.
I think you might
be able to use what
you've got here to possibly
get some funding for a larger
study.
And I would certainly
support and be
happy to be involved
in a larger study.
I think that a larger
sample size can only
give us more information.
And that's a good thing.
>> The endurance testing
also revealed improvements.
Nearly all of the runners
were able to run further
during their second test
after the smoothie experiment.
Though it may not
seem very significant,
that extra quarter
lap or half lap
that they gained after
drinking smoothies could
be the difference between
winning or losing the race.
The CrossFitters showed
even more improvement
than the runners.
After drinking
smoothie for six weeks,
their second endurance times
were nearly a minute faster
than their first.
What drives people to exercise?
What pushes a person
to run 100 miles?
Why do people religiously attend
CrossFit classes to suffer
through grueling workouts?
Is it the endorphins?
Is it the triumph
of mind over matter?
Going into this project,
I knew very little
about the lives of
extreme athletes.
It didn't take long to discover
that even from the sidelines,
being part of a long
footrace is infectious.
Seeing runners stumble
into an aid station
after running 80 miles, exuding
pure bliss and positivity,
inspires a subtle jealousy,
a sort of curiosity
to understand what these runners
feel after so many miles.
You can't help but wonder,
what the hell are they
experiencing out there?
And am I missing out?
Living so closely with
extreme individuals
for an entire summer
also helped me
to understand why we need
ultra runners, CrossFitters,
and other fitness freaks.
We need extreme athletes because
they push a stagnant society
forward.
By challenging what
is physically possible
extreme athletes inspire others
to rethink their own potential.
Working on this movie inspired
me to run a marathon myself.
Though I was always apprehensive
about running marathons
in the past because it
seemed unhealthy and radical,
after spending so much
time filming my athletes,
I couldn't help but
run a trail marathon.
At the beginning of this
film, I set out to research
whether green smoothies could
positively affect endurance.
The results of this
study have shown
that, yes, green smoothies
do in fact improve endurance.
But more importantly, we've
learned that green smoothies
reduce inflammation and
thereby speed up recovery,
reduce chances of injury,
and boost energy levels.
Thus, we can conclude
that green smoothies are
an effective method for boosting
performance and improving
the overall health of athletes.
Though the effects of green
smoothies on endurance
needs further study,
I believe we've
had a small glimpse
of what will someday
be a historic discovery.
Until then, I'm going to
keep drinking my smoothies
and pushing my own limits
of what is possible.
>> Friday, I make the
last batch of smoothies,
which means that
it's been six weeks.
Are you going to be sad
that smoothies are done?
>> Yeah.
I may have some
sort of withdrawals.
I mean, just being like
a cripple or something,
or just not having any energy.
May just end up being like a
moody old man or something.
>> Trying to figure out how
to keep you serving them up
in the future.
>> It's funny.
Everybody says that.
There's gotta be a way.
For money.
Green for green, right?
>> After the project, I'm
definitely figuring out a way
to keep this going.
Because it's crucial at
this point because it's
been so beneficial.
>> I'm definitely continuing
drinking the smoothies.
I actually look forward to
drinking smoothies every day.
>> Having to figure out now, OK,
how am I going to budget this
in when this whole
documentary is over.
Because, I don't
want to stop now.
>> It's day eight on
no green smoothies.
I'll say that, the change in
effects on the green smoothie
is subtle.
But going off of
them is not subtle.
Immediate inflammation.
I would just describe it
like, I was describing to you
earlier how I felt like
my body was falling apart.
My elbow is tore up.
My lower back, my left
shoulder, it's unbelievable.
It's the effects of not
having the green smoothie.
So I'm doing
everything I can to get
prepared to get back on them.
And just make it
a daily routine.
You truly are a green
smoothie hustler.
>> Psst, hey, this is the secret
part at the end of the movie.
>> This is how I drink smoothie.
More juice goes down.